[Music]
hello I'm maram masheri it's time now
for your questions answered over the
next 15 minutes we'll be answering
questions that you've sent in about the
Israel Hamas conflict which has now
entered its fourth day well this drone
video shows the scale of Destruction
reaped across the Gaza Strip over the
past few days Israel's Army claims to
have hit a further 200 Hass Targets in
overnight bombing Israel has ordered a
total blockade of Gaza cutting off food
water and supplies the UN Human Rights
Chief says The Siege is illegal under
international law while the World Health
Organization is calling for the
establishment of a humanitarian
Corridor well to answer your questions
I'm joined now by the BBC's Middle East
analyst Sebastian Asher and joining us
from Jerusalem as BBC correspondent
formerly based in Gaza John donison
hello to you both and thank you to you
both for joining us today Sebastian let
me start with you we have a question
from alimu jalo in Guinea and they say
why is the United States supporting
Israel with all the killing done in Gaza
it's a very understandable question it's
one that many people ask uh from all
around the world and I mean I think in
this particular instance at the moment
the US is certainly not alone in this
because of what Hamas has done because
of the atrocities that have been carried
out at the moment it's being uh seen by
most governments certainly most western
governments to be honest a lot of Arab
governments and so on around the world
as a terrorist act that will change
almost inevitably as The Siege on Gaza
grows but a wider context of that is the
US has essentially yes it it gives uh
huge financial support to Israel it
gives almost 4 billion dollars most of
that goes in military hardware most of
which comes from us companies it vetos
motions resolutions at the UN Security
Council which criticize Israel now the
US itself as government's
change essentially has stayed pretty
much the same position it sees itself
and it tries to present itself as an
evenhanded mediator in the conflict and
essentially adhering to the idea that a
two-state solution is what is needed
under President trump it changed
slightly but with President Biden it's
gone back to that but from the
Palestinian perspective they believe
that that just isn't the case but it
isn't evenhanded uh that it is
essentially so closely allied with
Israel not just in terms of the support
that it gives but also I mean in a
political sense I mean the us as a
democracy sees and I think most American
citizens see Israel as a the only
functioning democracy similar to the US
in the Middle East they see it as a
Force for good for that reason of course
there's a large Jewish population as
well uh in the US which has a big say in
elections and very few politicians want
to say anything that that goes against
what they have to say so I I mean I
think that the US has to some extent um
tried hard to get a solution to the
conflict there have been several incid I
mean back in 2003 was was the closest
for its come to the two-state solution
talks have stalled but there is this
sense and I think it's a very
understandable sense not just from the
Palestinians but but more widely that
its its finger is far more weighted
towards the Israeli side and the
Palestinian side despite the fact that
it will condemn some of Israel does and
most recently with the current far right
relatively far right Israeli government
under under under uh Benjamin Netanyahu
there's been some of the strongest
criticism so far from the US of an
Israeli government but at the moment
that is all in abeyance at the moment
the US would be 100% behind Israel
Sebastian thanks for that John let me
ask you a question put to us from Carol
Fenton and she says what will it take
for Hamas to stop trying to annihilate
the whole of Israel what compromise uh
would be enough how can peace be
achieved without Mutual understanding
and respect for both
sides I don't think it can and I think
that's why uh there has been this
intractable conflict now for decades and
decades and I think Gaza is important
because until some sort of uh compromise
as you say can be reached with heras in
Gaza you are never going to have peace
in the Middle East and I I think at some
points over the last decades when there
continues to be this talk from Western
countries the United States Britain the
EU uh of the the the goal being a
two-state
solution uh but Hamas because so many
countries regard Hamas as a terrorist
organization who they're not prepared to
talk to not part of the discussions it
was always fanciful really to think that
there could be a two-state solution
until Hamas were part of that deal and
they have not really suggested uh that
they were ready to accept the existence
of Israel uh as a state alongside a
possible future Palestinian State uh
that's been new nuanced at times over
the years but essentially Hamas says it
wants uh the land uh between the River
Jordan and the Sea so all of what was
historically Palestine it's interesting
what John said there Sebastian I want to
ask you about this I've had a lot of
emails about this from people the
terrorist organization Hamas why is it
that news organizations like the BBC
like ITV like sky like a number of other
organizations do not use the term
terrorists when describing Hamas
militants I think it's uh I mean there
are a number of reasons I think one of
the reasons is that when you are
broadcasting to a world audience uh you
want your perceptions the way that you
are are are are are are dealing with the
story not to look as if you are taking
any particular side and calling a group
a terrorist group will always look that
way and people will always be demanding
for this cause or that cause that it's
called terrorist or that is not called
terrorist so I so I think the BBC feels
that the best way that it can maintain a
sense of of of of some form of
objectivity of not looking partial is to
do that I think it becomes difficult ult
when there are acts atrocities that are
carried out I mean I think the way that
is often found around that by
organizations like the BBC is to speak
of Acts of Terror or to have the voices
of people who are denouncing it as
terrorism but not itself using that term
but yes it comes under criticism I'm
sure you and I John as well I mean we
have these discussions both
professionally but also personally you
know a great deal of the time and from
the Palestinian perspective I I mean
again uh many Palestinians just would I
mean I mean they would feel I think if
we described Hamas as a terrorist group
they would feel that that was in a sense
a kind of total rebirth to them I mean
they see it as a resistance movement and
they would see I think it as being like
the us but we no longer being
even-handed if if we took that let me
ask you another question Sebastian this
is from maragold Robbins in France and
maragold says the US and Europe defend
Ukraine why are they not defending uh
Palestine well I I mean there's more
Nuance to that question isn't there I
mean without getting deeply into Ukraine
I mean Ukraine was a situation that
suddenly erupted what we're talking
about and what John was talking about
there is a situation between Israel and
P but has been going on for decades and
it has you know it has shifted in its
balance time and time again Ukraine you
know was was was at least at the start
almost clearly from most perspectives an
invasion by Russia that Ukraine was
resisting and I think that Clarity at
that moment made it simpler for
governments to respond in that way
whereas the issue between the
Palestinians and the Israelis is one
which is so embedded in so many
different phases that it's harder for
governments to come out with such a
black and white position but I mean you
can't gainsay the fact that the European
Union that the UK the US I mean all of
these countries to provide financial
support to the Palestinians and have
done I mean the US has been though again
it blows hot and cold has been one of
the main supporters financially of the
UN a agencies which essentially keep the
Palestinians going as much as uh that is
achieved both in in Gaza and in occupied
West Bank so I mean I think with all of
these things Ian it's a very boring
answer but there is you know a great
deal of nuance to this and I think we as
journalists have to try and stay with
that as much as possible rather than
just going with the main thrust of a
story at one particular moment and try
and stay as true to that as possible and
try to make you know an audience uh uh
care about that aspect of a story rather
than just immediately go one side or the
other I don't know what John thinks
about
that well it's interesting I mean I uh
covered uh two short Wars in Gaza when I
was based there in 2012 and then I came
back in 2014 and one of the things that
struck me was um for example the United
States provides a lot of the military
support to Israel that causes so much of
the destruction in
Gaza uh and at the same time you know uh
a lot of the EU Britain France Etc
offers a lot of support to Israel in
dealing with Hamas in Gaza but then it
is also those same countries who uh
support Israel who are then having to
pay time and time again for the Recon
Construction in Gaza and it was a
really depressing situation I suppose
that what there was a sort of pattern of
every two three years there is another
war in Gaza and things will get rebuilt
and then things will get destroyed again
and I think what Israel has said this
time is
they they want to well both sides
actually Hamas has said they want an end
to the status quo they want to change
the dynamic and I think Israel now in
its retaliation feels that it wants to
do the same and change that status quo
in its Favor John thanks for that
Sebastian we had another question here
from Damen Armstrong and Staffordshire
uh saying why is financing to military
aid required and needed by Israel a
relatively rich country against the
Palestinians well I mean it's not simply
against the Palestinians I mean the the
the military support that's given to
Israel is meant to defend it against all
potential threats I mean from an Israeli
perspective we've heard from the prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu for years
and years but he sees Iran as the major
threat uh and that's a view that is
shared not just by the US and much of
the west but also increasingly by a lot
of Arab countries but it's a very valid
question and it's actually a question
that has been raised within Israel uh
quite regularly that it's almost I mean
it's different voices obviously uh that
that that that and for different reasons
and perhaps for their own you know
political motivations but bring up this
in a sense you know why should Israel be
beholden it it's it's a rich country
essentially it's a country that that you
know that is that is extremely developed
why does it need $3.8 billion from the
US um and does that make it you know
just a satellite of the US and I think
that that is an issue uh that at the
moment again will be put in a bance a
bit because we're seeing the US actually
offering more Military Support to Israel
in this particular situation and also
they're bringing warships to the region
so again I mean these issues which
really need to be looked at you know
very very seriously and with a Long
View made which actually affect the
long-term future in terms of support for
Israel the billions of dollars I mean
there's lots of criticism inside the US
why are we sending almost $4 billion to
a country that's that's rich when we
have huge problems in the US that need
to be addressed but that you know
several billion dollars of that could
surely be more usefully uh spent in the
US let's take you very briefly both of
you to live pictures uh coming into us
uh from Gaza and I just want to update
people on what the latest lines are
before we move on uh we of course have
had the uh Israeli forces saying that
they have targeted 200 Hamas targets
overnight and they are continuing to
Target Hamas targets through the day our
correspondent on the ground rushi
describing it as Like An Earthquake the
Damage Done uh by these bombs and air
missiles being thrown from Israel this
is the scene live in Gaza for those of
you watching
now Sebastian let me ask you uh another
question from a viewer this is an
anonymous viewer and they say I'm an
avid viewer of BBC News Channel I like
many others are concerned about the war
Hamas has engaged on Israel um my
question is although Hamas instigated
this war against Israel by breaching its
borders is it fair or could it even be a
war crime that Israel has stopped food
medicines and fuel getting into Gaza and
that is an anonymous question
well this is a story actually that we've
been dealing with just now the uh un uh
human rights Chief urk has just issued a
statement in the past hour saying that
to uh have a Siege like this of a
civilian population is against
international law it's a breach of
international La he hasn't quite put it
as um a war crime um but it I mean
saying very very strongly uh that this
is something that is not acceptable
under international law and you know I
mean the rhetoric we're hearing from
Israel and I mean John obviously is very
much across that as well is so
much against that at the moment I mean
it's so strong I mean you're hearing
both from politicians and the people
that they want there's an appetite for
this total Destruction of Gaza so in
that context I mean this sense that a
Siege of Gaza this denial of food this
denial of water and remember it's
already under blockade has been under
blockade for 17 years there's already
huge I mean the water situation is is
absolutely dire in in Gaza the
electricity situation all of these are
already sufficiently bad for Gaza to
have been described you know as one of
the poorest uh uh uh uh places in the
world one of the places where the
conditions of Life are pretty much at
their worst so what is really happening
with Israel is it's just tightening that
squeeze rather than bringing a Siege
from nowhere um but the way things are
at the moment the dynamic we're looking
at doesn't look like these sorts of
warnings from internation Community from
the UN are going to be heeded by Israel
certainly not now generally again John
can can can follow this that there has
been this recurring pattern where Israel
hits Gaza hard and then after several
weeks sometimes months the international
you know outrage over the numbers of
civilians who are being killed reaches
such a point that Israel feels that it
has to end it's it's it's it's it uh uh
to end its operation I think under these
conditions after what's happened on
Saturday in the last couple of days I
think we we aren't necessarily expecting
that to happen anytime soon John what's
your take on it having spent obviously a
good amount of time in Gaza what kind of
an impact is this total blockade
having well one thing I would say just
adding to what Sebastian was saying
there is um you know this is on a
completely different magnitude of the
wars the escalations in violence that
we've seen in the past I was just
looking back in 2009 there were 13
Israelis killed in that short war in
2012 I think it was six Israelis here
we're talking more than 900 and
potentially up to 150 hostages taken so
Israel is feeling it has the right
frankly to do whatever it wants and I
don't think it's going to listen uh to
the UN humans right Chief I don't think
it's going to listen to UNICEF I think
it feels that it will have the backing
of its public to do everything it wants
I mean okay you go to the um the
blockade which as Sebastian says has
been in place in some form uh from
Israel and also Egypt to the South for
17 years and certainly when I was there
and the last time I was kind of
regularly going into Gaza was in 2013 it
was bad um at period there were periods
when I was living there where virtually
half the food you were getting coming
into Gaza was coming through tunnels you
know you'd open a can of Coke and it was
covered with dust on the top coming in
from tunnels uh from Egypt at times uh
those restrictions have eased and Israel
has let more stuff in uh and uh more
exports out but the the big thing I
think that is
important is that about half of gaza's
population is under 18 it's a very very
young population and there are many many
people in Gaza who have never left you
know so they've never met an Israeli so
there's no interaction between the two
sides no understanding of the other
point the other side's perspective and I
think that is what is really really
difficult to overcome John donison in
Jerusalem thank you so much for
answering questions today Sebastian aser
in London with me thank you both of you
for answering viewers questions today
and as always thank you the viewer uh
who've been sending these questions to
us we'll leave you with these live
pictures of Gaza City bye-bye